A dozen alternative fuels are under development for vehicles. The
history of petrol and diesel as a fuel for vehicles began in 1858. The
technology which uses these fossil-fuels is known as internal
combustion. Think gasoline, diesel, kerosene or heavy fuel oil. Burning
these fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas, into the
atmosphere. The buildup of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse
gasses like methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and hydrofluorocarbons
(HFCs) is causing the Earth’s atmosphere to warm, resulting in changes
to the climate we are already starting to see today.

This encompasses the electric vehicles and hydrogen ignited vehicles. As
both the technologies are robust ideas to the industries they differ in
range, mileage, cost , safety and emission.

#### How does they Work ?

It’s crucial to comprehend how each technology functions before
comparing electric and hydrogen cars.

#### Electric Vehicles

In an electric vehicle, a lithium-ion battery is used to deliver
electricity to a motor, which moves the wheels and powers other parts of
the vehicle instead of fuel burning to power an engine. An electric car
is recharged by plugging into the electricity grid, just like a phone or
computer, instead of going to a gas station when it runs out of power.

#### Cars Powered by Hydrogen

An HFCV (hydrogen fuel cell vehicle) runs on the same kind of electric
motor as an ICE vehicle. Yet, it is propelled by a stack of fuel cells,
wherein pure hydrogen (H2) travels through a membrane to mix with
airborne oxygen (O2) to create the electricity that drives the wheels as
well as water vapor. The fuel cell’s design is comparable to that of a
battery. A catalyst that encourages the division of hydrogen atoms into
an electron and a proton is in touch with the hydrogen as it enters the
anode. The onboard batteries and the motors that turn the wheels are fed
with the electrons collected by the conductive current collector, which
is coupled to the high-voltage circuitry of the vehicle.

Even though a hydrogen automobile also has an electric motor, it
operates differently. Inside a hydrogen-powered vehicle, an oxygen and
hydrogen fuel cell react chemically to produce electricity and water
vapor.

#### Compared to hydrogen, electric cars have a longer-term advantage.

Alternatives to fossil fuel-powered cars that are more environmentally
friendly include electric and hydrogen-powered cars. The chemist John
Bockris saw the possibilities of what he called the “hydrogen economy”
as early as 1970. But how about right now? Why are some individuals so
sure that long-term, hydrogen cars are the superior option?

#### Infrastructure and hydrogen’s price

A hydrogen-powered car has an average purchase price of 70,000 euros,
although the cost of refueling varies greatly depending on the nation
and state. No matter where you reside, though, hydrogen is expensive: in
the US, according to Cleantechnica, it costs four times as much as an
electric car.

According to Hydrogen Europe, the price of hydrogen fuel cells has
decreased over the past five years by more than 80%.

Large-scale initiatives to introduce hydrogen electricity are being
developed in Europe. According to a survey by Hydrogen Mobility Europe,
in terms of infrastructure costs and logistics, “hydrogen infrastructure
scales better than rival zero emission technologies.” In other words,
once infrastructure is in place and hydrogen power is embraced by
fleets, it will finally be available to the general public.

#### Refueling and driving range for hydrogen

The quick refueling and range of the hydrogen vehicle are further
benefits. This explains why Renault stated in 2019 that it was adding
the Kangoo Z.E. Hydrogen and Master Z.E. Hydrogen to its lineup of
utility cars.

#### Stations for Recharging Electric Cars

The electric automobile is now enjoying the most support on a global
level when compared to hydrogen-powered vehicles. Governments all across
the world are making investments in the infrastructure needed to
introduce electric technology widely. Electric charging stations are now
commonplace in major cities like London and Paris, as well as at highway
rest areas, in parking lots for retail establishments, and along
roadways. Home charging stations are also becoming more prevalent, with
some governments (such as the UK) providing assistance for their
installation and purchase.

#### Charge times and prices for Electric Vehicles

The model, battery, and type of charging station utilized all affect how
long it takes and how much it costs to charge an electric vehicle.
Renault ZOE, for instance, may use a public charging station.

For instance, the Renault ZOE can recharge 80 kilometers of range at a
public charging station in just 30 minutes, and on a fast charging
station, the range can increase to 120 kilometers in the same amount of
time. The price of charging an electric automobile varies greatly based
on the battery capacity, the location, and the type of charging station.
When charged at home, an electric car that uses 15 kWh on average per
100 kilometers in France costs 2.25 euros and little over 3 euros in the
UK to travel 100 kilometers. In Germany, the cost to use both
conventional and rapid charging stations is approximately 0.30 euros per
kilowatt-hour.

High-power electric vehicle charging stations cost about ten euros extra
and can cost up to 0.90 euros per kilowatt-hour on networks that are not
partners.

Despite regional pricing differences, electricity is currently far more
affordable than hydrogen power. It’s simple to see that, despite a
greater initial cost for the automobile, an electric car is a wise
long-term investment in terms of money if you consider that the cost is
even lower if you recharge your electric car during off-peak grid
periods.

#### Will hydrogen vehicles supplant electric ones?

Despite being one of the “cleanest” fuels and the element with the
highest abundance on Earth, hydrogen power is still in its infancy. But
that doesn’t mean that cars powered by hydrogen don’t have a future.It
could be more intriguing to think of electric and hydrogen automobiles
as components of a common environment rather than focusing on electric
vs hydrogen vehicles. The creation of hydrogen has the potential to be
far less energy-intensive than the production of lithium-ion batteries,
which generate enormous amounts of CO2. Potential is the crucial word
here. All green advancements are helpful for the environment because
they make transportation less polluting than gasoline and diesel,
including electric and hydrogen cars.

<table class="table table-striped table-hover">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th scope="col">Factors</th>
      <th scope="col">Electric Vehicles</th>
      <th scope="col">Hydrogen Fueled Vehicles</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Fuel</th>
      <td>Electricity</td>
      <td>Hydrogen</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Cost</th>
      <td>High</td>
      <td>High</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Range(average)</th>
      <td>210 miles</td>
      <td>300-400 miles</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Safety</th>
      <td>
        All-electric vehicles tend to have a lower center of gravity than
        conventional vehicles, making them more stable and less likely to roll
        over.
      </td>
      <td>
        The two main hazards from fuel cell and hydrogen-powered vehicles are
        electrical shock and fuel flammability.
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Fuel Efficiency</th>
      <td>Estimated at 90%</td>
      <td>Efficiency of between 25 to 35 percent</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Cost of Maintenance</th>
      <td>Low(comparatively)</td>
      <td>High</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Fuel Cost</th>
      <td>Rs 250 but will take 6-8 hours.</td>
      <td>₹4 per km</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <th scope="row">Principle</th>
      <td>
        Power is converted from the DC battery to AC for the electric motor
      </td>
      <td>
        Powered by compressed hydrogen gas that feeds into an onboard fuel cell
        “stack” that doesn’t burn the gas, but instead transforms the fuel’s
        chemical energy into electrical energy.
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

#### Is hybrid technology the answer for the present?

Electric and hydrogen-powered vehicles still require improvement. Hybrid

technology may offer an alternative solution as the industry strives to
reduce the carbon footprint of the electric battery and hydrogen becomes
more accessible, particularly in terms of charging stations. Again,
Renault has anticipated this possibility and offers three models: the
New Clio (HEV), New Captur (PHEV), and New Mégane in full hybrid
(E-TECH, HEV) and full plug-in hybrid (E-Tech Plug-in) configurations
(PHEV).